[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
Why is it so important
for us to understand
masculine and feminine energies?
Well, for one thing,
understanding them will help us
have better relationships
with others in our lives.
Even more than
that, it will help
us have a better
understanding of ourselves
and how we flow energy.
When we can truly harmonize
these polar energies
within ourselves and
our relationships,
it sets us on the
road to harnessing
more of our full potential.
In this episode, we
take a deeper dive
into the archetypes
of the magician
and the high priestess.
Together, they awaken the
divine masculine and feminine
archetypes within us.
They are the primordial
yang and yin.
The yang being more
active and outgoing,
while the yin is more
receptive and internal.
So in a sense,
these two archetypes
are like the fool's
celestial parents.
They help us to connect with
the primal forces of creation
in the cosmos,
which are expansion
and contraction, outward flow
balanced with inward flow.
And the magician
helps us to learn
how to draw spirit
energy down for creation
into the external world, while
the high priestess helps us
on a subtle plane level
to connect inwardly
with spirit in order to
evolve our subtle body
and our consciousness.
I recall the mandala
wheel of the 231 gates
with the Tarot keys
placed around it.
The key zero, or the
fool, is placed at the top
of the wheel with olive.
And as the wheel now rotates
clockwise to keys one and two,
we begin the descent down
the left side of the wheel.
This descent is
about learning how
to master the physical plane.
The first seven keys also
relate to various stages
of preparation for
the great work.
And these form the early
lessons of this journey
that teach us about the
archetypal principles.
As we take our next step
on the hero's journey,
we meet the magician.
So why does a
magician come next?
Well, this represents
the first step
of that limitless life that's
depicted as the fool, which
now takes its step into
the journey towards self
actualization.
That's why as an
archetype the magician
represents the wizards, the
magi, and the wise men who
have the power to
make things happen
and to create by their will.
Most people today don't seem
to understand the proper use
of this word magic.
And that's largely because it's
been given a bad reputation
from both science and religion.
So let's clarify this term here.
What does the original use of
the word magic really mean?
Well, first of all, we
spell magick with a K
to indicate that we're
talking about real magic here
as opposed to trickery
or stage magic.
The K stands for
having the right keys
to perform real magick.
And some of these keys
are depicted in the Tarot
card of the magician.
So here's a definition
to write down.
Magick means to change nothing
into something or something
into something else.
In other words, it's the process
of creation and transformation.
One of the rules
for the magician
states that the
magician must bring
about a successful
combination of intense desire
and concentration with
an appropriate object.
He masters this art and science
of focusing his mind and will
towards the accomplishment
of his desires.
And yes, I did just say science.
In ancient Egypt, the
word magic meant the same
as what we mean
by science today.
In the old days, the
magicians were the priests.
They were the ones
with the knowledge,
and they preserved and taught
this knowledge to others.
A great example
of this archetype
is Hermes Trismegistus,
the sage priest magician
whose legacy and teachings have
lasted for thousands of years
through the Western
Mystery School tradition.
This path is about the quest
to understand and manifest
hidden wisdom.
And it's a path
that has produced
many mystical
philosophers like Socrates
and Plato and Pythagoras,
just to name a few.
Let's take a look at the
numerology for a moment.
Now, the fool was number zero,
which makes the magician number
one.
So number one is the
beginning of a cycle.
It's where creation begins,
and it's quite dynamic.
It represents the initiation
of all creative processes.
It's the seed or divine
spark of creation,
where all new ideas come from.
This number one is full
of authority, power,
and leadership.
Now, as we look at the imagery
of the card of the magician,
we see that this
key also depicts
this essence of concentration.
Notice his posture.
His right hand is upholding
a double-terminated wand,
while his left hand
is pointing down.
And with this right hand, he's
actively calling in the energy
from above through the wand
to be directed into creation.
That cosmic force then
passes through him
and through his
heart, in particular,
and then is directed into the
realms below to be manifested.
His left hand acts as
a transparent channel
for that power.
The magician recognizes
that he's just a conduit.
He's receptive to the
powers from above.
He's actively calling them in.
And then he's concentrating
them towards the object
of his focus.
This act of
concentration is shown
by his finger pointing
directly at what
he wants to focus it towards.
It's precisely directed towards
what he wants to create.
But at the same time, he
must remain transparent
so that the full amount
of light and power
can flow through him, meaning
he has to have this ability
to have mastered himself enough
to not block that flow of light
in any way.
He thus works in harmony
with the universe
using this "as above,
so below" principle.
Another way that
this is indicated
is with the sideways figure
eight that's over his head.
We call this the lemniscate,
or the infinity sign.
And it symbolizes
a balance point
that harmonizes the opposites.
The active masculine and the
receptive feminine principles
must work together.
This is true for all creative
work, even the creation
of the cosmos.
Now, the primary color
around the magician
is also bright yellow,
very similar to the fool.
And it again, represents
the element of air,
as well as that radiant
light of the spirit.
Now, in the Universal
Waite Tarot deck,
he is also surrounded by
this aura of white light,
indicating that his power
comes from a divine source.
The magician wears two robes.
His white robe is
the inner robe,
and it represents purity,
truth, and wisdom of the spirit,
while his outer
robe is red, and it
represents passion and desire
and active use of will.
Notice also that he
has a belt around him.
And this belt is a serpent that
bites its own tail, also known
as the ouroboros.
And this is symbolic of that
eternal cycle of transformation
and the tradition of alchemy.
The magician, as he's doing
his work, is in a garden.
This garden offers him a
private and sacred space
in which to perform his magic.
Now, the garden is something
that we must cultivate.
It's the ground of our
being that we must purposely
till and fertilize.
We have to pull the
weeds out of it,
and we have to plant
the seeds within it.
And it's something we must
consciously and actively tend
to in order for it to
thrive and be beautiful.
This garden represents our life.
And the soil in which it grows
is our subconscious mind.
The flowers of this garden are
red roses and white lilies.
The red roses represent
desire, the desire
to create what we want and to
live a fulfilled life that's
aligned with our highest good.
The roses represent
the kinds of things
that we want to experience
with our five senses.
But the white lilies
represent knowledge.
This is more of an
abstract kind of knowledge.
It's about grasping hidden
truths and the higher
principles or laws
of the universe.
So desire and the
quest for knowledge
are the two things that drive
the magician in his work.
Oh, in front of the magician
we see a table or an altar.
And this represents the
field of his attention.
The altar also has sacred
tools and symbols upon it
that represent what he
wants that energy to be
flowing through into the world.
Ultimately he wants
everything in this energy
to be manifested in the
three-dimensional world
of physicality.
And so he has to have all
four elements on the altar.
So we see these symbols
are magical tools that
represent the four elements.
The elements of Earth is
represented by the pentacle,
or the five-pointed star.
And this symbolizes
our ability to wield
all the powers of nature
and direct them into form.
It represents the success
of the fifth element,
or the spirit
embodied in the flesh.
The water element is represented
by the chalice or the grail
on the altar.
This is our ability to
receive inspiration,
to connect with intuition, and
to use our active imagination.
This allows us to reach beyond
the ordinary three-dimensional
way of operating and into
the spiritual realms.
The air element is represented
by the sword, which
is our ability to
access a higher mind
and to act with discernment,
while the fire element is
represented by the wood
staff, representing
our ability to harness and
steer our will and our desires.
Well, as a whole, this key is
an image of the great work.
What is the great work?
There's an old motto of the
initiates that refers to it.
And this is how it goes.
It says "to will, to know, to
dare, and to keep the silence."
So what does this mean?
Well, let's break each
of these parts down.
"To will" is to exercise
our personal will,
which implies choice
and discernment.
And the challenge here is
to follow our inner calling,
even if it goes against common
opinions and what's acceptable.
We need to stay
engaged and motivated,
even when others might
nay stay or not support
what it is we're trying to do.
The second part of
this motto, "to dare,"
refers to times when
certain subjects
and spiritual practices
are restricted.
And various powers that be,
whether political, religious,
or whatnot, don't
want us to do them.
And it takes daring
and courage to stand
against those cultural norms.
It calls for bravery
and nonconformity
and independent thinking.
The third part, 'to
know," is to always
have a thirst for knowledge
and understanding and learning.
It refers to the
old saying that was
above the doors of all the
ancient mystery schools, which
said, know thyself.
The fourth part of this
motto, "to keep the silence,"
relates to not talking to
others about your creative work
or magical operations.
And this is in an effort to
keep it sacred and protected.
Plus, when you're
creating something
and you talk about
it before it's done,
other people's opinions
might interfere or distort
what you're trying
to accomplish.
What is this magician key
really trying to teach us?
This path shows us that
we have all that we
need to achieve success.
But we must learn to use all of
our spiritual tools to do so.
The magician shows us
how to contact and direct
that source energy.
But it takes discipline
to remain attentive
to that higher power.
And this self
mastery can only be
borne through actively engaging
in deep personal practice
and the use of the tools.
Now, the magician
stands in exact contrast
to the unbridled fool.
He represents concentration,
will, technique,
and all the skills that
are necessary for achieving
success.
And this skill is to be found in
the divine masculine archetype
which the magician represents.
He's like the celestial
father energy.
Well, his secret title or secret
name is "The Magus of Power."
And the elements
that he works with
is a combination
of air and water.
And that's because the
planet and the metal
that he corresponds
to is Mercury.
Mercury is the closest
planet to the sun.
And it has the fastest
orbit in our solar system.
And the Roman god
Mercury, to whom
this planet was named after,
was the messenger of the gods.
He transmits wisdom to humans.
Mercury's often depicted
with winged feet and helmet.
And he's quick and
witty and communicative.
He's a fast learner,
and he likes
to teach what he
knows to others.
He brought many
inventions to humanity
and is the most important
deity to the alchemists.
He's also associated
with Thoth Hermes
from the ancient
Egyptian and Greek myths.
The ancient Egyptians
attributed the source
of all their science and
wisdom to Thoth Hermes/Mercury,
including the science of
astronomy, astrology, math,
geometry, medicine, language,
logic, rhetoric, music,
alchemy, magic, and so on.
He was the great
magician or transformer.
He's often depicted
as holding a conducive
staff, which is a symbol of
the alchemical and the healing
arts.
And the magical gifts
that Mercury might give us
include the
caduceus, or it might
include the Ibis bird, which
is related to the god Thoth,
or the all-seeing eye,
which relates to wisdom.
Because mercury represents
communication, intellect,
and reason, his influence
can sometimes make us
a bit analytical at times.
So we have to
watch out for that.
Now, in astrology, Mercury rules
Gemini and Virgo, as well as
the third house of
communication and intellect.
And it also rules the
sixth house of health.
Now, there's a number of other
key words or qualities that are
associated with the magician.
These include everything from
expression to communication,
having good timing, being
flexible, conscious use
of our power, confidence
in the skills that we have,
creative abilities.
Now, again, the strengths
are the balanced
or the pure expression
of the archetype.
But when that archetype gets
into imbalances or distortions
as it expresses
itself through us,
it can come into a weakness
or a shadow aspect.
That happens when it's
either too much or too little
of that quality
coming into our life.
So examples of some
of the weaknesses
and the vises of
the magician could
be being untruthful
or thoughtless,
being pessimistic, being
scattered or indirect.
And in his darker
forms, the magician
might engage in
trickery and deceit,
even the use of black magic for
personal or destructive intent.
As we look at the
shadow and as we
work to bring it
to light within us,
the magician can
help us to recognize
that there's more
to any situation
than what meets the eye.
And he gives us the power to
create order out of chaos.
He also helps us to recognize
and to see our own potential
and be able to
visualize the work that
is required to manifest it.
Some of the benefits
that we gain
when we work with
the magician include
helping us to be able
to prioritize and make
wise choices in our life.
He encourages us to
take action rather
than simply wishing
for change or success
to just happen for us.
We can also work
with the magician
when we want to focus
our energy effectively
to accomplish our goals.
But what are some ways
the magician might show up
in our lives today?
Well, think of the times when
you've either been the magician
or you've encountered the
magician in somebody else.
For example, recall
a time when you were
inspired to create something.
Remember how you had to go
from a mere idea or inspiration
to then creating a more clear
vision of it in your mind,
perhaps then having to
communicate it with others,
and then devise a plan
to bring it into reality,
and finally to harness your
talents and take action
to make it happen.
It's in creative
times like this,
the magician was most
active in your life.
But what might our parallel life
look like under the archetype
of the magician?
Well, in ages past,
we might have actually
been a wizard or a shaman.
But if we're looking for
more contemporary examples,
think of a successful
entrepreneur
who has a high degree of
skill and communications.
Other examples of a magician
in some kind of profession
might include teaching,
counseling, consulting,
management, various
aspects of media.
And whatever the field, if
they're truly a magician, then
they will master their
trade and create success.
By working with the magician
and invoking its energies
into our life, we, too, can
awaken our magic and mastery.
But before we move into the
practical and experiential
aspects, let's
work with one more
archetype and weave
these two together.
Our second step on
the hero's journey
brings us to the high priestess.
The high priestess represents
the divine feminine aspects
of creation.
But what really is that?
The more we get to know
the high priestess,
the more we realize she's just
as magical as the magician.
Yet she's also more
subtle and ethereal.
Here, the high
priestess is clearly
connected with the moon.
She has crescent moons at her
feet and also in her crown,
representing all
the lunar cycles
and the principle of rhythm.
First of all, she is
ruled by number two.
And the number two
represents balance.
It's receptive, and it's
feminine as an even number.
Number two is a mirror.
It duplicates.
It copies.
It reflects.
It has to do with the acts of
transcription and reproduction.
Two introduces polarity
and even duality,
whereas one was
all just the unity.
But now we have two.
So we have polarity and duality.
And let's get further
into her symbolism
as we explore now the
imagery of the Tarot card.
And the first thing you notice
about the high priestess
is that while she's in this
position of high esteem,
she's rather young
in appearance.
Her inner robes
and her head scarf
are white, representing her
purity and her virginity.
Her outer robe is blue,
which flows like a waterfall.
And this represents a
very important concept
of what we call the stream
of consciousness that flows
through the rest of the deck.
Anywhere that we see water
in the remaining cards,
the original source
of that water
is the robe of the
high priestess.
The water represents that prima
materia, the root of matter.
And according to ancient
hermetic teachings,
what causes matter
to manifest is
the thoughts of the one mind.
This is known as the
first hermetic principle
of mentalism, which says
that "the All is mind.
The universe is mental."
But the high priestess is
more like the subconscious
or the unconscious aspect
of this universal mind.
It's the magician, who's the
active or conscious aspect
of that mind, while the high
priestess is the subconscious.
And the magician is the
one who applies his will
and concentration to
determine what manifests out,
whereas the high priestess is
the receptive substance who
then births whatever seeds
he plants within her.
On her own, she is simply
pure virgin potential.
Notice that her robe
flows in waves of energy.
This represents the
principle of vibration.
It says that "all things
vibrate; all things
move," which we know to be true
as well from science today.
Now, the high priestess's crown
shows the phases of the moon,
referring to the
cycles of nature
and the principle of rhythm.
This crown also symbolizes
the Egyptian goddess Isis.
Isis was the original
high priestess
of the ancient Egyptian
mystery schools.
And some of her legends
say that she taught women
how to harness the
cycles of nature,
how to dig canals from the
Nile out to water the fields.
And she was said to possess
the secret name of Ra,
giving her the power to
create, to bestow life,
and to alchemically
transmute anything.
And notice the
horns of her crown.
On the high
priestess, these horns
touch two of the pomegranates
on the veil behind her.
And this veil is
very interesting.
It's stretched
between two pillars.
And on the veil is an embroidery
of pomegranates representing
feminine, sexuality, as well
as palm leaves, which represent
the masculine sexuality.
And this relates to
the hermetic principle
of gender, that interplay of
masculine and feminine energies
that are needed for creation.
These symbols are arranged in
the form of the Tree of Life,
reminding us that this is
the pattern of all things.
And the horns of her crown touch
the supernal triad of the tree,
connecting her to
the celestial realms.
Behind the veil is a vast
sea of cosmic mind stuff.
And on her chest is
an equal-arm cross,
which represents this balance
of as above, so below,
that principle of
correspondence.
That equal-arm cross also
represents the balance
of the four elements.
Now, the high priestess
sits inside a temple.
And she sits upon
a cubicle stone.
The cube represents
the soul, or it also
represents the
container for creation
or the formation of matter.
As the high priestess sits, she
sits between these two pillars.
But she in the middle is
representing the middle pillar,
while the two white and black
pillars on either side of her,
which are labeled
J and B, represent
the principle of polarity.
These two pillars are
called Jachin and Boaz,
the famous pillars
of Solomon's Temple,
and the two side pillars
of the Tree of Life.
Now, the tops of the
pillars are lotus flowers,
which represent
here the blooming
of feminine subconscious force.
And finally, the scroll in
the high priestess's lap
says Tora on it, which
represents and relates
to the laws.
And here it's both the physical
and the spiritual laws,
the laws that
operate our universe.
This is also a symbol of
the hermetic principle
of the law of cause and effect.
Now, inside her scroll is
the memory or the recordings
of all things.
As you can start
to see, there is
a lot of rich symbolism
in this card here.
It's very layered.
This one image contains
symbols for all seven
hermetic principles that govern
the creation of our universe.
Well, what is the high
priestess and all this imagery
of her card trying to teach us?
Well, her main
lesson is that there
is a constant flow of polar
energies in our lives,
all of which serve a
purpose and are according
to the laws of the universe.
She's the universal mind, that
great cosmic and quantum sea
within which we live,
move, and have our being.
She's responsive
to and reflective
of self-consciousness,
or the energy that
comes from the magician.
And her responsiveness
is what makes the magic
of the magician even possible.
And the best
methods that we have
for tuning into her our
meditation and silence.
Listening to your
inner high priestess
allows you to know the
greater whole of who you are
and to get clear about
what do I really want?
Now, let's go through some
of her other correspondences.
Obviously, the high
priestess relates
to the element of water.
She's the cup, the
container of everything.
And the waters of her robe flow
through the rest of the deck.
Now, the secret name,
or the esoteric title
of a high priestess,
she's called
the Priestess of the
Silver Star, which
is an allegory to the moon.
Her astrological
correspondence is the moon.
The moon governs the tides
of our monthly cycles
and it influences our feelings,
our emotional reactions,
and so forth.
The cycles of the
moon really govern
our subconscious, as well as
our psychological undercurrents
and the various
rhythms of our life.
And it's interesting
to note that
similar to how the moon gives
off no light of its own--
it only reflects the
light of the sun--
well, it's the same with how
our subconscious mind reflects
the light of our spirit.
Now, take note of where the moon
appears in your natal chart.
This will show you the
influence of the moon
on your emotional nature, how
you express your emotions,
as well as perhaps
some relationship
to mother figures in your life.
Now, in astrology, the moon
rules the sign of Cancer.
And it also rules
the fourth house,
which is the house of
home and maternal figures.
Now, positively
in her expression,
the moon is sensitive,
caring, and nurturing.
But in the negative side,
she can be grasping, moody,
and irritable.
And some other attributes and
key words the high priestess
include intuition, independence.
She's the gateway to
knowledge, and she
reveals hidden mysteries.
Now, again, the strengths
are the balanced or the pure
expression, whereas
the weaknesses
are when we get into
imbalances or distortions of it
being too much or too little.
So let's explore her
weaknesses for a moment.
The vices of the high priestess
include inertia, rigidity,
and self-made obstacles.
And some other weaknesses
that can show up
in the shadow side
of the high priestess
include an inability to trust
our intuition, also not having
a good relationship with
the feminine side, which
might show up as a dislike
towards other women,
or it could also be showing up
as issues with feminine elders
and authority figures.
Now, as we acknowledge
our shadow side
and how that part of it
is showing up within us,
that's when we can start
to transform it and bring
the shadow to the light.
We can start to do that
work of spiritual alchemy
and reveal the gifts that
are hidden within the shadow.
So some of the ways to
bring the shadow into light
is trusting your intuition
and making wise decisions
based upon your intuition.
Other benefits that
are gained by working
with the high priestess include
helping us with self-reflection
and introspection.
She encourages us
to bring awareness
to our subconscious
and our connection
to the collective unconscious.
Now, how does the high
priestess show up in our life
here and now?
Well, think of times when you've
either been or encountered
the high priestess in your life.
Consider also your relationship
with female authority figures
in your life.
Do you have good
relationships with them?
If not, why not?
And what might you need
to do to heal or clean up
your perception of them?
At some level, these women
represent the high priestess
energy to you.
Now, as adults,
our task is to find
the balance between
the dualities
and the polarities of life.
We're here to become the
middle pillar between them,
just like the high
priestess who sits
at that middle pillar between
the pillars of polarity.
And this is true whether
you're a man or a woman.
We all have both feminine and
masculine qualities within us.
And the more you come to
recognize the high priestess
in your life, the
more it will then also
connect you with one
of your parallel lives,
where the high priestess
is the dominant archetype.
Well, what might
our parallel life
be like under the archetype
of the high priestess?
Well, in times past,
we might actually
be a high priestess
living in the cloisters
of the ancient temples.
But if we're looking for
more contemporary examples,
perhaps we could also
think of a female scientist
who is seeking to understand
the laws of the universe
and matter.
She spends most of her days in
the cloisters of a laboratory
or the academic halls
of a university.
But despite her
role as a leader,
or perhaps because
of it, she often
finds herself alone, with very
few people she can confide in.
But she must rely on herself
and her own inner knowing.
It can be a long and lonely
path under the archetype
of high priestess.
But she'll find her
magician at some point.
Fortunately, she has
developed the ability
to nourish herself from
within through the meaning
that she gets out of her work.
And she also has a deep love for
harmony, beauty, and balance,
which she brings to her life.
And by working with
the high priestess
and invoking her
energies into our life,
we, too, can awaken our
intuition and inner knowing.
Join me again, as
we explore further
into the 22 archetypes
of Tarot and how
they can help us to make our
big shift in consciousness.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for exploring
the mysteries of Tarot
and our
multi-dimensionality with me
in this episode of
"Mystery Teachings."